# Frequently Asked Questions

## Does select2 behaves as a standard C/C++ like if ?

The semantics of Faust is always strict. That's why there is no real `if` in Faust. And that's why the `ba.if` in the library (based on `select2` ) can be misleading. 

Concerning the way `select2` is compiled, the strict semantic is always preserved. In particular, the type system flags problematic expressions and the stateful parts are always placed outside the if.  For example:
```
process = button("choose"), (*(3) : +~_), (*(7):+~_) : select2;
```
is compiled in C/C++ as:

```
for (int i = 0; (i < count); i = (i + 1)) {
    fRec0[0] = (fRec0[1] + (3.0f * float(input0[i])));
    fRec1[0] = (fRec1[1] + (7.0f * float(input1[i])));
    output0[i] = FAUSTFLOAT((iSlow0 ? fRec1[0] : fRec0[0]));
    fRec0[1] = fRec0[0];
    fRec1[1] = fRec1[0];
}
```

When stateless expressions are used, their proper computation if forced by putting them in local variables, as in the following example:
```
process = select2(button("choose"), sin:cos, cos:sin);
```
which is compiled in C/C++ as:

```
for (int i0 = 0; (i0 < count); i0 = (i0 + 1)) {
    float fThen0 = std::cos(std::sin(float(input0[i0])));
    float fElse0 = std::sin(std::cos(float(input1[i0])));
    output0[i0] = FAUSTFLOAT((iSlow0 ? fElse0 : fThen0));
}
```
To therefore preserve the strict semantic, even if a non-strict `(cond) ? then : else` construction is finally used to produce the result of the `select2` expression.

For computations that need to avoid certains values or ranges (like doing  `val/0` that would return INF, or `log` of a negative value that would return NAN), the solution is to use min and max to force the arguments to be in the right range of values. For example, to avoid division by 0, you can write `1/max(epsilon, x)`.

## Pattern matching and lists

Strictly speaking, there are no lists in Faust. For example the expression `()` or `NIL` in Lisp, which indicates an empty list, does not exist in Faust. Similarly, the distinction in Lisp between the number `3` and the list with only one element `(3)` does not exist in Faust. 

However, list operations can be simulated (in part) using the parallel binary composition operation `,` and pattern matching. The parallel composition operation is right-associative. This means that the expression `(1,2,3,4)` is just a simplified form of the fully parenthesized expression `(1,(2,(3,4)))`. The same is true for `(1,2,(3,4))` which is also a simplified form of the same fully parenthesized expression `(1,(2,(3,4)))`. 

You can think of pattern-matching as always being done on fully parenthesized expressions. Therefore no Faust function can ever distinguish `(1,2,3,4)` from `(1,2,(3,4))`, because they represent the same fully parenthesized expression `(1,(2,(3,4)))`. 

This is why `ba.count( ((1,2), (3,4), (5,6)) )` is not 3 but 4, and also why `ba.count( ((1,2), ((3,4),5,6)) )` is not 2 but 4. 

Explanation: in both cases the fully parenthesized expression is `( (1,2),((3,4),(5,6)) )`. The definition of  `ba.count ` being:

```
count((x,y)) = 1 + count(y);  // rule R1
count(x)     = 1;             // rule R2 
```
we have:

```
ba.count( ((1,2),((3,4),(5,6))) ) 
-R1->   1 + ba.count( ((3,4),(5,6)) ) 
-R1->   1 + 1 +  ba.count( (5,6) ) 
-R1->   1 + 1 + 1 + ba.count( 6 )
-R2->   1 + 1 + 1 + 1 
```
Please note that pattern matching is not limited to parallel composition, the other composition operators `(<: : :> ~)` can be used too.

## What is the situation about Faust compiler licence and the deployed code?

*Q: Does the Faust license (GPL) apply somehow to the code exports that it produces as well? Or can the license of the exported code be freely chosen such that one could develop commercial software (e.g. VST plug-ins) using Faust?*

A: You can freely use Faust to develop commercial software. The GPL license of the compiler *doesn't* apply to the code generated by the compiler. 

The license of the code generated by the Faust compiler depends only on the licenses of the input files. You should therefore check the licenses of the Faust libraries used and the architecture files. On the whole, when used unmodified, Faust libraries and architecture files are compatible with commercial, non-open source use.
