# Welcome to Faust
**A Functional Programming Language for Real Time Signal Processing**

## What is Faust?

[Faust](https://faust.grame.fr) (Functional Audio Stream) is a functional programming language for sound synthesis and audio processing with a strong focus on the design of synthesizers, musical instruments, audio effects, etc. Faust targets high-performance signal processing applications and audio plug-ins for a variety of platforms and standards.

The core component of Faust is its compiler. It allows to "translate" any Faust digital signal processing (DSP) specification to a wide range of non-domain specific languages such as C++, C, JAVA, JavaScript, LLVM bit code, WebAssembly, etc. In this regard, Faust can be seen as an alternative to C++ but is much simpler and intuitive to learn.

Thanks to a wrapping system called "architectures", codes generated by Faust can be easily compiled into a wide variety of objects ranging from audio plug-ins to standalone applications or smartphone and web apps, etc. (check the Quick Tour of the Faust Targets section for an exhaustive list.

## Site Content
What are you gonna find here?
This site documents all the Faust environment : 

- the compiler and how to use it
- etc...

## Getting Started
There are many ways to get started with Faust, choose the one that suits you the best:

- If you have an hour or two to spare, check out [Quick Start](guide/quick-start/) Tutorial (recommended option).
- If you're in a hurry or if you hate to wait, check out our [Online Examples](https://faustide.grame.fr).
- If you wanna do things the right way, read the [Faust Manual](https://github.com/grame-cncm/faust/raw/master-dev/documentation/faust-quick-reference.pdf).