<!-- doc-begin -->

# Introduction 

## What is Faust?

Faust (Functional Audio Stream) is a functional programming language for sound 
synthesis and audio processing with a strong focus on the design of 
synthesizers, musical instruments, audio effects, etc. Faust targets 
high-performance signal processing applications and audio plug-ins for 
a variety of platforms and standards. It is used on stage for concerts and 
artistic productions, in education and research, in open source projects as 
well as in commercial applications.

The core component of Faust is its compiler. It allows to "translate" any Faust 
digital signal processing (DSP) specification to a wide range of non-domain 
specific languages such as C++, C, JAVA, JavaScript, LLVM bit code, WebAssembly, 
etc. In this regard, Faust can be seen as an alternative to C++ but is much 
simpler and intuitive to learn. 

Thanks to a wrapping system called "architectures," codes generated by Faust 
can be easily compiled into a wide variety of objects ranging from 
[audio plug-ins](TODO-tutorial) to [standalone applications](TODO-tutorial) or 
[smartphone](TODO-tutorial) and [web apps](TODO-tutorial), etc. (check the 
[Quick Tour of the Faust Targets](#a-quick-tour-of-the-faust-targets) section
for an exhaustive list.

This manual gives an overview of the Faust programming language and of its 
features through various interactive examples.

## What is Faust Good For?

Faust's syntax allows to express any DSP algorithm as a block diagram. For 
example, `+` is considered as a valid function (and block) taking two arguments 
(signals) and returning one:

<!-- faust-run -->
```
process = +;
```
<!-- /faust-run -->

Blocks can be easily connected together using the `:` "connection" composition:

<!-- faust-run -->
```
process = + : *(0.5);
```
<!-- /faust-run -->

In that case, we add two signals together and then scale the result of this 
operation.

Thus, **Faust is perfect to implement time-domain algorithms that can be easily 
represented as block diagrams** such as filters, waveguide physical models, 
virtual analog elements, etc.

**Faust is very concise**, for example, here's the implementation of a one pole 
filter/integrator equivalent to <span class="math inline">\\(y(n) = x(n) + a_{1}y(n-1)\\)</span> (where  <span class="math inline"\\(>a_{1}\\)</span> is 
the pole):

<!-- faust-run -->
```
a1 = 0.9;
process = +~*(a1);
```
<!-- /faust-run -->

**Codes generated by Faust are extremely optimized** and usually more efficient 
that handwritten codes (at least for C and C++). The Faust compiler tries to 
optimize each element of an algorithm. For example, you shouldn't have to 
worry about using divides instead of multiplies as they get automatically 
replaced by multiplies by the compiler when possible, etc.

**Faust is very generic** and allows to write code that will run on dozens of 
platforms.

<!-- If we stick to this, we should also talk about the web capabilities: in
other words be a bit more specific here. -->

## What is Faust Not (So) Good For?

Despite all this, Faust does have some limitations. For instance, it doesn't 
allow for the efficient implementation of algorithms requiring multi-rates such 
as the FFT, convolution, etc. While there are tricks to go around this issue, 
we're fully aware that it is a big one and we're working as hard as possible on 
it.

Faust's conciseness can sometimes become a problem too, especially for complex 
algorithms with lots of recursive signals. It is usually crucial in Faust to 
have the "mental global picture" of the algorithm to be implemented which in 
some cases can be hard.

While the Faust compiler is relatively bug-free, it does have some limitations 
and might get stuck in some extreme cases that you will probably never 
encounter. If you do, [shoot us an e-mail](https://sourceforge.net/p/faudiostream/mailman/)!

From here, you can jump to ... if you wanna get your hands dirty, etc. TODO.

## Design Principles

Since the beginning of its development in 2002, Faust has been guided by
various design principles:

* Faust is a *specification language*. It aims at providing an adequate 
notation to describe *signal processors* from a mathematical point of view. 
Faust is, as much as possible, free from implementation details. 
* Faust programs are fully compiled (i.e., not interpreted). The compiler 
translates Faust programs into equivalent programs in other languages (e.g., 
JAVA, JavaScript, LLVM bit code, WebAssembly, etc.) taking care of generating 
the most efficient code. The result can generally compete with, and sometimes 
even outperform, C++ code written by seasoned programmers. 
* The generated code works at the sample level. It is therefore suited to 
implement low-level DSP functions like recursive filters. Moreover the code can 
be easily embedded. It is self-contained and doesn't depend of any DSP library 
or runtime system. It has a very deterministic behavior and a constant memory 
footprint. 
* The semantic of Faust is simple and well defined. This is not just of 
academic interest. It allows the Faust compiler to be *semantically driven*. 
Instead of compiling a program literally, it compiles the mathematical function 
it denotes. This feature is useful for example to promote components reuse 
while preserving optimal performance.  
* Faust is a textual language but nevertheless block-diagram oriented. It 
actually combines two approaches: *functional programming* and *algebraic 
block-diagrams*. The key idea is to view block-diagram construction as function 
composition. For that purpose, Faust relies on a *block-diagram algebra* of 
five composition operations: `: , ~ <: :>` (see the section on 
[Diagram Composition Operations](#diagram-composition-operations) for more
details).
* Thanks to the concept of *architecture*, Faust programs can be easily 
deployed on a large variety of audio platforms and plug-in formats without any 
change to the Faust code.

## Signal Processor Semantic

A Faust program describes a *signal processor*. The role of a *signal processor* 
is to transforms a (possibly empty) group of *input signals* in order to 
produce a (possibly empty) group of *output signals*. Most audio equipments can 
be modeled as *signal processors*. They have audio inputs, audio outputs as 
well as control signals interfaced with sliders, knobs, vu-meters, etc. 

More precisely :

* A *signal* <span class="math inline">\\(s\\)</span> is a discrete function of time 
<span class="math inline">\\(s:\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}\\)</span>. The value of a signal <span class="math inline">\\(s\\)</span> at time <span class="math inline">\\(t\\)</span> is 
written <span class="math inline">\\(s(t)\\)</span>. The values of signals are usually needed starting from time <span class="math inline">\\(0\\)</span>. 
But to take into account *delay operations*, negative times are possible and 
are always mapped to zeros. Therefore for any Faust signal <span class="math inline">\\(s\\)</span> we have 
<span class="math inline">\\(\forall t<0, s(t)=0\\)</span>. In operational terms this corresponds to assuming that 
all delay lines are signals initialized with <span class="math inline">\\(0\\)</span>s. 
* Faust considers two type of signals: *integer signals* 
(<span class="math inline">\\(s:\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow\mathbb{Z}\\)</span>) and *floating point signals* 
(<span class="math inline">\\(s:\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow\mathbb{Q}\\)</span>). Exchanges with the outside world are, by 
convention, made using floating point signals. The full range is represented by 
sample values between <span class="math inline">\\(-1.0\\)</span> and <span class="math inline">\\(+1.0\\)</span>.
* The set of all possible  signals is <span class="math inline">\\(\mathbb{S}=\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}\\)</span>.
* A group of <span class="math inline">\\(n\\)</span> signals (a *n*-tuple of signals) is written 
<span class="math inline">\\((s_{1},\ldots,s_{n})\in \mathbb{S}^{n}\\)</span>. The *empty tuple*, single element of 
<span class="math inline">\\(\mathbb{S}^{0}\\)</span> is notated <span class="math inline">\\(()\\)</span>.
* A *signal processors* <span class="math inline">\\(p\\)</span>, is a function from *n*-tuples of signals to 
*m*-tuples of signals <span class="math inline">\\(p:\mathbb{S}^{n}\rightarrow\mathbb{S}^{m}\\)</span>. The set 
<span class="math inline">\\(\mathbb{P}=\bigcup_{n,m}\mathbb{S}^{n}\rightarrow\mathbb{S}^{m}\\)</span> is the
set of all possible signal processors.

As an example, let's express the semantic of the Faust primitive `+`. Like any 
Faust expression, it is a signal processor. Its signature is
<span class="math inline">\\(\mathbb{S}^{2}\rightarrow\mathbb{S}\\)</span>. It takes two input signals <span class="math inline">\\(X_0\\)</span> and 
<span class="math inline">\\(X_1\\)</span> and produces an output signal <span class="math inline">\\(Y\\)</span> such that <span class="math inline">\\(Y(t) = X_0(t)+X_1(t)\\)</span>. 

Numbers are signal processors too. For example the number <span class="math inline">\\(3\\)</span> has signature  <span class="math inline">\\(\mathbb{S}^{0}\rightarrow\mathbb{S}\\)</span>. It takes no input signals and produce an 
output signal <span class="math inline">\\(Y\\)</span> such that <span class="math inline">\\(Y(t) = 3\\)</span>. 
